Java 1.0 Blog Post (#13953)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/java-1-0/index.md

    linkedin: "Java, the world’s most trusted enterprise programming language, is now generally available in Pulumi. You can now leverage Java’s familiar, expressive, and safe syntax to manage your infrastructure in a composable and scalable way.
    
    Learn more about automating everything you run in the cloud with Java: [Link]"
---

One of Pulumi’s core features is the ability to [model infrastructure](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/concepts/) using well-traveled, familiar general-purpose programming languages. Users have built Pulumi programs with first-class support for TypeScript, Python, Go, YAML, and C# for the past seven years. Today, we’re welcoming another language into the mix, as Java is now officially generally available.

<!--more-->

We’ve grown our Java support based on feedback from the expanding set of companies that have adopted Pulumi Java in production workloads. Let’s look at some examples of using Java to power your Pulumi programs.

## Familiar Composability

> Using Java with Pulumi lets you model your infrastructure using familiar patterns. Paired with rich abstractions, you can efficiently build Pulumi programs. It only seems appropriate that we take a look at a Java example using Oracle Cloud:

Reviewer: I'm wondering if we should mention `pulumi new oci-java` at all?

1. We start our program by grabbing our [configuration](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/concepts/config/) values that describe which distro and AD to use.

    ```java
        var config = ctx.config();
        var compartmentId =  config.require("compartmentId");
        var availabilityDomain =  config.require("availabilityDomain");
        var ubuntuId =  config.require("ubuntuId");
    ```

2. Next, we create a set of abstractions to describe the networking and OS.

    ```java

>         var javaVCN = new VirtualNetwork("virtualNetworkResource", VirtualNetworkArgs.builder()
>                         .compartmentId(compartmentId)
>                         .cidrBlock("10.0.0.0/16")
>                         .build());
> 
>         var javaSubnet = new Subnet("testSubnet", SubnetArgs.builder()
>                         .cidrBlock("10.0.0.0/24")
>                         .compartmentId(compartmentId)
>                         .vcnId(javaVCN.id())
>                         .availabilityDomain(availabilityDomain)
>                         .build());
> 
>         var javaVNIC = InstanceCreateVnicDetailsArgs.builder()
>                         .subnetId(javaSubnet.id())
>                         .assignPublicIp("true")
>                         .build();
> 
>         var ubuntu24 = InstanceSourceDetailsArgs.builder()
>                         .sourceType("image")
>                         .sourceId(ubuntuId)
>                         .build();

Reviewer: Do we have to use the `java` prefix in the variable names? One wouldn't normally do that in their program.

Fixed indentation and renamed some of the variables.

```suggestion
    var vcn = new VirtualNetwork("virtualNetworkResource", VirtualNetworkArgs.builder()
            .compartmentId(compartmentId)
            .cidrBlock("10.0.0.0/16")
            .build());

    var subnet = new Subnet("testSubnet", SubnetArgs.builder()
            .cidrBlock("10.0.0.0/24")
            .compartmentId(compartmentId)
            .vcnId(vcn.id())
            .availabilityDomain(availabilityDomain)
            .build());

    var vnicDetails = InstanceCreateVnicDetailsArgs.builder()
            .subnetId(subnet.id())
            .assignPublicIp("true")
            .build();

    var sourceDetails = InstanceSourceDetailsArgs.builder()
            .sourceType("image")
            .sourceId(ubuntuId)
            .build();
```

    ```

3. Finally, we compose our instance.

    ```java

>         var instance = new Instance("instanceResource",
>                         InstanceArgs.builder()
>                             .availabilityDomain(availabilityDomain)
>                             .compartmentId(compartmentId)
>                             .shape("VM.Standard.E2.1.Micro")
>                             .preserveBootVolume(false)
>                             .createVnicDetails(javaVNIC)
>                             .sourceDetails(ubuntu24)
>                         .build()
>                 );

Reviewer: Format and variable name updates

```suggestion
    var instance = new Instance("instanceResource", InstanceArgs.builder()
            .availabilityDomain(availabilityDomain)
            .compartmentId(compartmentId)
            .shape("VM.Standard.E2.1.Micro")
            .preserveBootVolume(false)
            .createVnicDetails(vnicDetails)
            .sourceDetails(sourceDetails)
            .build());
```

    ```

With just a few lines of code (especially by Java standards), we composed a set of strongly typed, easy-to-reason about resources using the builder pattern (a Java favorite) and without introducing any new language paradigms.

## Automation Abstractions with the Pulumi Automation API

> With the introduction of our Java language support, we’re also excited to announce that the [Automation API](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/using-pulumi/automation-api/) is now supported in Java. The Automation API is a fully typed SDK that allows you to interact with Pulumi programs outside the Pulumi CLI. You can directly access and orchestrate your Pulumi projects and stacks with the SDK. This allows you to integrate Pulumi into other systems, such as CI/CD pipelines or internal tooling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the general availability of our Java language support, we’re also excited to announce that the [Automation API](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/using-pulumi/automation-api/) is now supported in Java. The Automation API is a fully typed SDK that allows you to interact with Pulumi programs outside the Pulumi CLI. You can directly access and orchestrate your Pulumi projects and stacks with the SDK, allowing you to supercharge your Infrastructure as Code.
```

> In our Automation API [examples repo](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples), we have an example demonstrating how you could construct a Pulumi program with the Automation API to [perform a database migration](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/java-databaseMigration). Let's take a look at a few of the interesting aspects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our Automation API [examples repo](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples), we have an example demonstrating how you could construct a Pulumi program with the Automation API to [perform a database migration](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/tree/main/java/databaseMigration). Let's take a look at a few of the interesting aspects:
```

> 1. Like regular Pulumi programs, we're able to obtain the current operating context and use the details to construct new resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Like regular Pulumi programs, we're able to obtain the current operating context and use the details to construct new resources, inline with the rest of the Automation API program.
```

    ```java

>                 var vpcId = Ec2Functions.getVpc(
>                         GetVpcArgs.builder().default_(true).build()
>                         ).applyValue(GetVpcResult::id);
> 
>                 var subnetIds = Ec2Functions.getSubnets(GetSubnetsArgs.builder()
>                     .filters(GetSubnetsFilterArgs.builder()
>                     ...
>                     .collect(Collectors.toList()));
> 
>                 var subnetGroup = new SubnetGroup("db-subnet", SubnetGroupArgs.builder()
>                         .subnetIds(subnetIds)
>                         .build());
> 
>                 var securityGroup = new SecurityGroup("public-security-group", SecurityGroupArgs.builder()
>                         .ingress(SecurityGroupIngressArgs.builder()
>                             ...
>                         .build());
> 
>                 var cluster = new Cluster("db", ClusterArgs.builder()
>                     ...
>                     .build());
> 
>                 var clusterInstance = new ClusterInstance("db-instance", ClusterInstanceArgs.builder()
>                     .clusterIdentifier(cluster.clusterIdentifier())
>                     ...
>                     .dbSubnetGroupName(subnetGroup.name())
>                     .build());
> 
>                 ctx.export("host", cluster.endpoint());
>                 ctx.export("db_name", dbName);
>                 ctx.export("db_user", dbUser);
>                 ctx.export("db_pass", dbPassword);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Consumer<Context> program = ctx -> {
        ...

        var subnetGroup = new SubnetGroup("db-subnet", ...);

        // Make a public security group for our cluster for the migration
        var securityGroup = new SecurityGroup("public-security-group", ...);

        // Example values for our db
        var dbName = "hellosql";
        var dbUser = "hellosql";
        var dbPassword = "hellosql";

        // Provision our db
        var cluster = new Cluster("db", ClusterArgs.builder()
                .engine(EngineType.AuroraMysql)
                .engineVersion("8.0.mysql_aurora.3.08.0")
                .databaseName(dbName)
                .masterUsername(dbUser)
                .masterPassword(dbPassword)
                .skipFinalSnapshot(true)
                .dbSubnetGroupName(subnetGroup.name())
                .vpcSecurityGroupIds(securityGroup.id().applyValue(List::of))
                .build());

        var clusterInstance = new ClusterInstance("db-instance", ClusterInstanceArgs.builder()
                .clusterIdentifier(cluster.clusterIdentifier())
                .instanceClass("db.t3.medium")
                .engine(EngineType.AuroraMysql.getValue())
                .engineVersion("8.0.mysql_aurora.3.08.0")
                .publiclyAccessible(true)
                .dbSubnetGroupName(subnetGroup.name())
                .build());

        ctx.export("host", cluster.endpoint());
        ctx.export("db_name", dbName);
        ctx.export("db_user", dbUser);
        ctx.export("db_pass", dbPassword);
    };
```

    ```

2. With the Automation API, however, we're also able to directly interact with project and stack objects, giving us the opportunity to orchestrate workflows. This could include scaffolding
projects, working across stacks, or in our case, completing a one-time workflow to migrate a database.

    ```java

>             var projectName = "database_migration_project";
>             var stackName = "dev";
> 
>             try (var stack = LocalWorkspace.createOrSelectStack(projectName, stackName, program)) {
> 
>                 stack.getWorkspace().installPlugin("aws", "v6.68.0");
> 
>                 stack.setConfig("aws:region", new ConfigValue("us-west-2"));
> 
>                 stack.refresh(RefreshOptions.builder()
>                         .onStandardOutput(System.out::println)
>                         .build());
> 
>                 var result = stack.up(UpOptions.builder()
>                         .onStandardOutput(System.out::println)
>                         .build());
> 
>                 configureDatabase(
>                     ...
>                 );
>             }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    var projectName = "database_migration_project";
    var stackName = "dev";

    try (var stack = LocalWorkspace.createOrSelectStack(projectName, stackName, program)) {
        ...

        stack.getWorkspace().installPlugin("aws", "v6.68.0");

        stack.setConfig("aws:region", new ConfigValue("us-west-2"));

        System.out.println("updating stack...");
        var result = stack.up(UpOptions.builder()
                .onStandardOutput(System.out::println)
                .build());

        var changes = result.getSummary().getResourceChanges();
        if (!changes.isEmpty()) {
            System.out.println("update summary:");
            changes.forEach((key, value) -> {
                System.out.printf("    %s: $d%n", key, value);
            });
        }

        System.out.printf("db host url: %s%n", result.getOutputs().get("host").getValue());
        configureDatabase(
            ...
        );
    }
```

    ```

> The full example, along with many others, is available in our Automation API [examples repo](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/java-databaseMigration). We're excited to bring the Automation API to the Java SDK for the first time and anticipate rapid iterations as feedback comes in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The full example, along with others, is available in our Automation API [examples repo](https://github.com/pulumi/automation-api-examples/tree/main/java). We're excited to bring the Automation API to the Java SDK for the first time and we're looking forward to your feedback.
```

> ## Get Started with Pulumi Java

Reviewer: Should we link to here as the first link? https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/languages-sdks/java/

---
title: "Pulumi's Java SDK is Now Generally Available"

> date: 2025-02-06

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2025-02-10
```

> date: 2025-02-10

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2025-02-10T16:15:00-08:00
```

                .build());

        var clusterInstance = new ClusterInstance("db-instance", ClusterInstanceArgs.builder()
                .clusterIdentifier(cluster.clusterIdentifier())
                .instanceClass("db.t3.medium")
                .engine(EngineType.AuroraMysql.getValue())
                .engineVersion("8.0.mysql_aurora.3.08.0")
                .publiclyAccessible(true)
                .dbSubnetGroupName(subnetGroup.name())
                .build());

        ctx.export("host", cluster.endpoint());
        ctx.export("db_name", dbName);
        ctx.export("db_user", dbUser);
        ctx.export("db_pass", dbPassword);
    };
    ```

2. With the Automation API, however, we're also able to directly interact with project and stack objects, giving us the opportunity to orchestrate workflows. This could include scaffolding
projects, working across stacks, or in our case, completing a one-time workflow to migrate a database.

    ```java
    var projectName = "database_migration_project";
    var stackName = "dev";

    try (var stack = LocalWorkspace.createOrSelectStack(projectName, stackName, program)) {
        ...

>         stack.getWorkspace().installPlugin("aws", "v6.68.0");

Reviewer: This is now:

```suggestion
        stack.workspace().installPlugin("aws", "v6.68.0");
```

        stack.setConfig("aws:region", new ConfigValue("us-west-2"));

        System.out.println("updating stack...");
        var result = stack.up(UpOptions.builder()
                .onStandardOutput(System.out::println)
                .build());

>         var changes = result.getSummary().getResourceChanges();

Reviewer: This is now:

```suggestion
        var changes = result.summary().resourceChanges();
```

        if (!changes.isEmpty()) {
            System.out.println("update summary:");
            changes.forEach((key, value) -> {

>                 System.out.printf("    %s: $d%n", key, value);

Reviewer: I had a typo in my program that I fixed:

```suggestion
                System.out.printf("    %s: %d%n", key, value);
```

            });
        }

>         System.out.printf("db host url: %s%n", result.getOutputs().get("host").getValue());

Reviewer: This is now:
```suggestion
        System.out.printf("db host url: %s%n", result.outputs().get("host").value());
```

---

> title: "Pulumi's Java SDK is Now Generally Available"

Reviewer 2: Can we have a little more fun w. the title?

"Our Java Tastes Better Than Ever"

or anything that looks like we have some personality?  :)

meta_image: meta.png

authors:
    - justin-vanpatten
    - mark-huber
tags:
    - java
    - features
    - releases

social:
    twitter: "☕ The Pulumi Java SDK is now Generally Available! Manage your infrastructure using the composable, strongly typed programming language you already know and love - now including the powerful Pulumi Automation API!"
    linkedin: "Java, the world’s most trusted enterprise programming language, is now generally available in Pulumi. You can now leverage Java’s familiar, expressive, and safe syntax to manage your infrastructure in a composable and scalable way.
    
    Learn more about automating everything you run in the cloud with Java: [Link]"
---

One of Pulumi’s core features is the ability to [model infrastructure](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/concepts/) using well-traveled, familiar general-purpose programming languages. Users have built Pulumi programs with first-class support for TypeScript, Python, Go, YAML, and C# for the past seven years. Today, we’re welcoming another language into the mix, as Java is now officially generally available.

<!--more-->

> We introduced Java in preview in 2022. Since then, we’ve grown our Java support based on feedback from the expanding set of companies that have adopted Pulumi Java in production workloads. Let’s look at some examples of using Java to power your Pulumi programs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We’ve grown our Java support based on feedback from the expanding set of companies that have adopted Pulumi Java in production workloads. Let’s look at some examples of using Java to power your Pulumi programs.
```

## Familiar Composability

> Using Java with Pulumi lets you model your infrastructure using familiar patterns. Paired with our rich abstractions, you can efficiently build Pulumi programs. For instance, let’s take a look at an example from our docs that shows how, in a few lines of code, you can:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using Java with Pulumi lets you model your infrastructure using familiar patterns. Paired with rich abstractions, you can efficiently build Pulumi programs. For instance, let’s take a look at an example from our docs that shows how, in a few lines of code, you can:
```

    ```

2. Define an ACM certificate, passing along the defaults defined in Step 1

    ```java
    var cert = new Certificate("cert",
    CertificateArgs.builder()
        .domainName("pulumi.com")
        .validationMethod("EMAIL")
        .build(),
    CustomResourceOptions.builder()
        .provider(useast1)
        .build());
    ```

3. Instantiate an ELB listener, injecting the cert from above

    ```java
    var listener = new Listener("listener",
        ListenerArgs.builder()
            .loadBalancerArn(loadBalancerArn)
            .port(443)
            .protocol("HTTPS")
            .sslPolicy("ELBSecurityPolicy-2016-08")
            .certificateArn(cert.arn())
            .defaultActions(ListenerDefaultActionArgs.builder()
                    .targetGroupArn(targetGroupArn)
                    .type("forward")
                    .build())
            .build());
    ```

With just a few lines of code (especially by Java standards), we were able to use out-of-the-box abstractions (Pulumi providers) and the builder pattern (a Java favorite) to compose a set of strongly typed, easy-to-reason about resources.

## Automation Abstractions with the Pulumi Automation API

> With the introduction of Java 1.0, we’re also excited to announce that the [Automation API](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/using-pulumi/automation-api/) is now supported in Java. The Automation API is a fully typed SDK that allows you to interact with Pulumi programs outside the Pulumi CLI. You can directly access and orchestrate your Pulumi projects and stacks with the SDK. This allows you to integrate Pulumi into other systems, such as CI/CD pipelines or internal tooling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the introduction our Java language support, we’re also excited to announce that the [Automation API](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/iac/using-pulumi/automation-api/) is now supported in Java. The Automation API is a fully typed SDK that allows you to interact with Pulumi programs outside the Pulumi CLI. You can directly access and orchestrate your Pulumi projects and stacks with the SDK. This allows you to integrate Pulumi into other systems, such as CI/CD pipelines or internal tooling.
```

(I think we're actually at 1.1, not 1.0)

just fyi, this previews oddly on my machine!  (gray, not black)

Author: It's rendering gray in GH for me as well, but I did confirm that it renders correctly in the blog post itself

<img width="970" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fb5cef71-c9e6-4032-bbce-12f46717ef72" />
